C
FIGURE LEGEND
Figure 1. Quantificatien of the Eymmepadia's reactions in the
higassay. Omna xn same as cantral with seawater;
arm af zeastar graps aver tuhe feet; 2  retraction et
arm, fallewed by streching aut af tube feet 3slight
arm gurl; 4 = curl seen in "3", followed by lifting and
halding arm verticallyt S - strang curl af arm a eve
tighter curl, followed by starfish meving away from arca.
Cy ganaliculatum comes in contact with a Fyenepedia tube
Figure
fast at itz anterier and and hegins to turn away.
Cw canaliculatum is proveked by Eyenmpedia tube foct from
Figure3.
the anterier end, rezulting in the snail lifting up it
shell and running away, sometimes secreting the yelle
hypsbrancial substange at the same t.
After repeated pesterier provecation with a Fymnapadia
Figure 4.
tube foot, Ce canaliculatum begins to spin its shell back
and farth and thrawz itself forward in a samer saulting
metien while secreting the hymchranchial substande.
Ereyeation ntines afte aaliclatum tue
Figu
ayer, and the snail retracts mest af the way inte its
shell, pulses aut more af the yellow substance, and pulls
all way back inte ithel 1.
Ca ganaliculatum is attacked on a vertical surface from
Figure a.
the pesterior and by a Fymmapadia tube fect causing the
mnail to run up tha zummtrabum.
E. gamaliculatum displays the substratum release respense
Figure 7.
after being pravaked frem the anterier end an a vertical
surface by a Myanmpadia tube foct.
Fallowing zubstratum relmase, C canaliculatum lands en
Figure
itz back and tries ta right itselt.
Cm ganaliculatum is proveked by a tube foot before being
Figure.
able to right itself and it quickly pulses aut the yella
zubstanze and retracts inte itz sheil.
Each paint en the graph is an average af the ameunt er
Figure 10.
vellow substance secreted by each group af snails within
the four meperate tanks thraughaut the testing per iad.
The yisually determined ameunts based on the yelicwme
af the mixture were quantified using the scale describe
in the Materials and Metheds zection of this paper.
Hach peint en the graph is an average af the reactior
Figuri 11.
displayed by Exmnepadia to the yellow substance secreted
hy mach greup af snails within the four seperate tan
throughout the testing peried. The visually qualitied
